They didn't get any money from Weird Tales, $100 a month, but they certainly did
the best they could. Gernsback was less willing to pay. He paid, and finally I
got a lawyer for the American Fiction Guild to collect what he only 20% around
$300 and it must have been for about 60,000 words a copy one of the things I
wanted to ask you about was you started off with a sort of fantasy science
fiction story of metal men and then you went deeply into science fiction but I
think one of your most fascinating things that I read was darker than you think
what caused the change in your writing what causes Well, I'm not sure, except
that people change and grow and sometimes decay and whatever. When I wrote
Darker Than You Think, I was under psychoanalysis. I was in Hollywood. for the
conclusion of it, I first went to Dr. Tedd at the Munninger Institute in Topeka
and worked with him for about a year and broke off for a couple of years and
decided I needed some more and moved to Beverly Hills in the meantime and stayed
another year. The psychiatrist in the story is now reflects some attitudes
toward Dr. Tidd. I think it's probably unfair or unfair to him to say that, but
it seems to me that looking back now at the story and what he tries to say, Will
Barbee starts up in terror of the forces of darkness, and in the end, he finds
he is part of them. And that, in a way, is reflection of my own experience. I
can remember a time when I felt that I was involved in a strong conflict between
will and emotion where I made resolutions that were difficult to keep and felt
sort of divided against myself.
I feel that I got to be all better integrated so that I am no longer
subconscious of internal conflicts or wanting to do things that I do not do or
attempting to make resolutions that that I wouldn't be able to keep. I just have
a degree of acceptance of myself, of the unconscious, of the whole human nature?
That I didn't have. I think that's probably the basic emotional structure of the
novel. You weren't attempting then to … Did you have any serious ideas about the
lycanthropy, the werewolf, that that was the reason for it? that kind of genetic
inheritance? Well, I think the lycanthropy is an excellent or apt or whatever
symbol for, let's say, the quote, dark forces of the unconscious. And I didn't
certainly have any serious, but belief in magic or lycanthropy It was pure
fantasy or science fiction, but unfortunate invention because it was symbolic
and expressive and so in its own way true. To go forward a little bit, another
book I wanted to ask you about is Brother to Demon, Brother to Gods, more or
less on genetic engineering and so forth. I took that book as fairly optimistic
in its ending. I think it is. It was meant to be. I'm certainly interested in
genetic engineering. It seems to me that well the big scientific event, well 40
years ago when it happened, was the splitting of the atom, and unraveling of DNA
is, has somewhat more profound consequences when we began to realize them. And
years ago, I wrote a novel, in which, well, so far as I know, but it invented
the term genetic engineering, or it had probably been around in other works,
called Dragon's Island. But that was published in 51, which was a couple of
years before Watson and Craig made that great breakthrough. And then more
recently, I decided to come back to it and to push the possibilities of genetic
engineering as far as I could imagine them. Would you accept it? I mean, is it
something you're for? Well, I don't think it's a matter of being for it or not.
I think it's going to happen. I think that people are going to be opposed to it
and there'll be conflicts and so forth, but assuming that science and technology
remain alive, well, I think genetic engineering is going forward. It has so many
possible uses in the manufacture of insulin, the manufacture of interferon, and
the possibilities for, let's say, improving health and happiness, and comfort
and longevity are so vast that you can't imagine people refusing to do it, and
if we go ahead with it, it involves the potential of improving or changing and
tinkering with the human germplasm and rebuilding the race itself. As I said,
it's fascinating to watch, and in the story of us set up the Smithwick family as
the creators and have them recreating their own children so they would be better
genetic engineers generation after generation. I set up these four creations.
The true men who were genetically perfect, who were happy and smart and peaceful
and good citizens of society and the new men who were specialized for space or
warfare or anything else. And the gods ruled and then discovering that the gods
were created a little bit too much in the image of man so that there needs to be
another creation to supplant the gods. And the gods naturally don't want to be
supplanted. And it struck me that this was, let's say, a beautiful dramatic
situation with the essence of conflict of conflict and discovery and revelation
where these two naked kids on the preman reservation faced with the problem of
keeping alive when the gods are after them to grow up and discover what they are
and might make the old a man to replace the gods. It was just fun to do, let's
say. And I wouldn't say that it's possible But I wouldn't say it's impossible.
That is, I think that it is imaginative exploration of what could happen. Would
you say in that book that man is sort of controlling his own evolution? Well, it
seems to me we can control our own evolution. And that, in a way, is not very
remarkable, because for many thousands of years, We've been controlling the
evolution of horses and cattle and dogs and so forth, so that obviously human
evolution can be controlled, and since we're discovering, let's say decoding the
genetic message, where we can do it more effectively and genetically,
effectively and efficiently, than it was already done before. What about, this
isn't exactly the same kind of material, but it is in a way, that story on
Guinevere for Everybody about cloning.
Is cloning something you can foresee as possible or good? I can't really see any
good in it or not much good anyway, but it seems to me it's possible we can
already clone frogs and with continual
refinement and laboratory processes and understanding and so forth I can see
cloning human beings but a human clone as far as I can see is is essentially an
identical or a queen and not a sort of supernatural second self. So, assuming
that you had clones, it seems to me that they would have to be grown up
individually and educated individually. And they would not be doppelgangers or
second selves or instant duplicates of the donor, or whatever. You can't see why
it shouldn't happen. It seems to me that there's a possibility of using the
cloning technique to, for example, to grow a new heart that would be a perfect
replacement of a normal heart because it's grown out of the same tissue and such
things as this. It might be possible to grow a whole series of implants and
replacements that would make make life go on almost essentially forever. As far
as I know, the brain cells are not replaceable and they won't live forever. So I
can't see that as a real way to immortality. One more question on this
particular point. Say in reference to cloning or genetic engineering, would you
say that there is no area of science that man, I mean man can monkey with
anything he wants, is there anything which we shouldn't touch which would be
wrong for science to meddle with or monkey with? Well I suppose I'm sort of a
relativist, maybe I'm a Darwinian evolutionist. It's hard to find any absolute
symbols or standards or whatever of what is wrong and right. If you look at the
whole evolutionary picture why some things, patterns of growth and ways of
behavior and so forth lead to the survival of the individual and the species and
some don't. That's one available standard of behavior and if you look at that
why the technology seems likely to survive and prevail unless they destroy
themselves. And whatever is going to destroy the race is obviously bad in that
way, and it seems to me when we open the atom, we're skating on thin ice, and
there might be similar hazards in genetic engineering. That is, theoretically,
we could design a form of life that would wipe us out. Maybe we will. Maybe we
need the humanoids to keep us from doing that. That's what they're for. But
personally, being a sort of individualist, I hate to give up completely to the
humanoids. There is one more work. I keep forgetting about this one, the CT
work, CT ship, CT shock. Is that the way that's pronounced, by the way? CT?
Contra-terrine matter? Yes, it was abbreviated contra-terrine with the letters C
and T, and I just spelled it out. That was a work I did for Kamel and I enjoyed
doing it. I went to him with the idea for a series of stories about the
planetary engineers who would terraform new worlds. That is, would rebuild them,
tinker with the atmosphere, the chemistry, maybe the gravitation whatever, to
make them suitable for human settlement. And Cummel suggested that some of these
new worlds might be CT, that is, Aided Matter, which was pretty new to science
fiction then. I was fascinated, and I did a series of stories and then a serial
that eventually became two novels. Where did you come up with the concept
terraform? Did you coin that word? As far as I know, I invented the word. My
name is David and you began to recite a few such terms that I think I can claim
credit for such as terraforming and psionics, and the android is distinct from
Robert and so forth. Didn't the CT novel and the short stories lead into a
syndicated strip in the newspapers? that was exciting adventures. I was sitting
at my desk one day when a phone rang and the editor of the New York Sunday news
was on the line and wanted to know if I would come to New York and write a comic
strip. And I caught my breath and said I would, and they had read one of the CT
novels reviewed in the New York Times by a rather superior reviewer, and said
that the plot was pretty interesting, but the way of writing made it look like a
science fiction comic strip. And this was in the early days of commercial TV,
when people were turning on the tube on Sunday morning instead of writing the
Sunday news. Somebody thought that if it had exclusive strips instead of
syndicated strips that everybody else had. It might give them a competitive age.
They originally planned for new comics including a Western and a Mystery and
Adventure, I think, but the science fiction was the only one they did. It ran
for three years, but eventually didn't turn out to be the answer to TV. the
artist was Lee Elias who used to work with MLK Niff on Terry and the Pirates and
has a nice clean cut style and was good with new and strange characters and good
with machines and the thing was fun to do. My heart was broken when it ended
because I'd come to enjoy getting my regular check. it was at that time that I
went back part-time into the academic world. I started taking college courses
while the strip was running because it didn't take all my time to write it. I
asked for a graduate assistantship and math and they didn't have one, but I was
was that I just stared to one in English which turned out to be a fortunate
choice and the academic world did mesh very well with writing. It's wonderful to
be paid to read good literature and talk about it with a congenial group of
students. And I enjoyed teaching and found that I was able to continue writing
during holidays and vacations. and maybe I learned a little bit more about
literature and about people and so forth. It was a very happy experience. Didn't
you also put together one of the first courses on science fiction? I think so.
Mark Heligance at Colgate University wrote the first one that I knew about. It
was written up in the National Server and I kept the article out I showed it to
the curriculum committee and my chairman at Eastern and I got approval for a
course. What time was that? That was, let's see, Helligus started his course in
1962 and I started mine in 1964 and taught it for a dozen years, spent part of
those years doing all I could to promote academic science fiction elsewhere and
accumulated descriptions of other courses and lectured and published articles
and finally put together a textbook for science fiction teachers and anthology
of articles by Likes of Asimov and Gwynn and Gunn and others that has finally
been published
I have a question about your own opinion this may not be a fair question to ask
of an author, but do
you have favorite books, favorite stories, characters, as you look back, that
you would, say, like most to be remembered for? Many of my own. Yeah, on your
own. Yes. I think darker than you think is probably the thing, the novel, that,
let's say, fell into place most pleasingly. When I look back on it, it seems
still to work. It's still engaging and still means something. Humanoids has been
my most successful, most widely translated novel, but the original Novelette
with folded hands said essentially what I wanted to say in more compact and
satisfying ways so that I always felt the novelette was a better story than the
novel. That, in a way, has been my most successful and popular work. The
novelette has been reprinted many, many times. How many languages has the
humanoid been translated into it? Well, I don't know, but most of the Western
European languages and Japan, and let's see, it's just going into several
Croatians and Hebrew.
But it's gotten around. I want to add something about your working method. When
you come up with a concept for a story, you know, whatever it is, you know, CT
or humanoids, whatever, do you get a concept and then find a story to fit it, or
do you have a story that you shove the concept into? Is there...
Well, I'd like to say I think that it just grows. I often began with some sort
of abstract idea, like the conflict or primitivism and progress, or whatever,
and I looked for the essence of conflict in the basic idea, and then tried to
find characters of forces that would embody this conflict, and in the early
stages of it, why the whole thing is very flexible, almost flimsy. You can do
anything to it if you want to, turn it inside out. But if it works, it gradually
comes alive and the characters become real. They, until, they are, well, human
beings that I feel that I know, and it sort of, change becomes very difficult to
make. I noticed looking over some of your manuscripts at Eastern New Mexico
University that you do revise. It seems to me that you had revised. Is that a
normal process of your writing to go back over? More and more. In the beginning,
I saw myself as a pulp writer. My idols in the pulp field were such figures as
Max Brand, who was said to write 4,000 words every day, including Sundays and he
sent it out in rough draft. The course of his life, he said it would have
published between 30 and 40 million words. And I tried to do that for years, and
sometimes believe it or not, it worked. Most of my work for several years was
submitted in the first draft and often accepted and liked by the fans, but as
time goes on, I change. The market changes. changes I become I guess more
conscious of technique and the ways that things can go wrong. So now a day it's
when I write a paragraph, I have a tendency to take it apart and rewrite it
instead of going wrong, which was one reason for buying this new word processor,
because it seems to facilitate the revision immensely. You compose on a monitor
and if you don't like what you see there, where you can over-type it or delete
it or whatever, and save whatever's good without having to re-type it.
How do you keep up with science? You must have a fairly extensive scientific
background, or any good science fiction writer must. Well, I've always been, as
I said, fascinated with science as a sort of unfolding mystery. that is I want
to know as much as I can about the nature and the origins of the universe. I
subscribe to a whole group of magazines, Science News, Scientific American
Science, which is the publication of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, which is, which I'm pretty technical, but some things I
can read and understand. I subscribe to a couple of astronomy magazines. I
subscribe to a couple of computer magazines. since I bought the word processor
and occasionally I get off to other events. My wife and I attended the Jupiter
flyby at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory March, a year ago, and got a short story
out of that that I called it Descent into the Great Red Spot though I think
that's changing the name of it and we've been invited back to the Saturn and fly
by come November and something like that, which gives you an opportunity to see
actual science at work, and science unfolding is about as exciting as anything
could be. The Jupiter flyby, while the pictures of Jupiter and its satellites
were coming in on the monitors, one every 48 seconds. Most of them you knew
would never be seen again. And there were select some for more study, but most
of them would disappear. And it was just exciting. It was like exploring a new
solar system. These satellites up to that time had just been spots of light in
the telescope, and at the nearest best approaches it was you could see details
just a few kilometers across. And each satellite was different, with a different
history, with different clues about the origins of itself and the whole solar
system and maybe the universe. Things like that might make science as
interesting as anything I know. To change the subject again, let's see, if I
remember now, you have been president of the Science Fiction Writers
Association, or you still are? I finished my second term less than a month ago.
I hope now to get back to more science fiction. The term is for how long? Each
term is for only one year. It was a very rewarding experience. I guess I have
said before science fiction is a pretty small, friendly, close community and a
lot of people in it have been good friends over the years. and it was an
opportunity to try to do something for science fiction. But it took a bit of the
time. What were your duties, if you don't mind me breaking in? We have about 500
members. We have all sorts of activities. One of the most important is a
grievance committee that tries to, let's say, avoid difficulties with editors
and publishers and so forth. but to make sure that they treat us right. We have
the nebula awards that are given each year to recognize working the field. We
attempt to also publicize and propagandize science fiction. And there are many,
many people in our organization who devote a lot of priceless time and energy to
this, but the whole thing has to be coordinated and people drop out and have to
be replaced and misunderstandings develop that have to be somehow explained and
new projects come along that need to be supported. There wasn't any one thing
that took a great deal of time, but there was a continual flow of problems and
minor decisions and so forth, so that every week I'd have to spend maybe a
couple of days catching up on the mail and phone calls, and whatever. What are
the criteria for membership? Does everybody who, is everybody automatically a
member who publishes a story or does it have to take application or. you make
application, and an affiliate member has to have at least one story
professionally published, and an active member the requirement for that is three
stories, short stories, or short works that doesn't have to be fiction stories
or a longer works such as a novel or whatever. The deals now now, of forty
dollars a year, and we have two publications, a monthly, well, between them,
they're monthly, a forum that is essentially for the members with official
business and market reports and whatever, and a bulletin that comes out four
times a year that is devoted devoted to more general articles, background
material on science and science fiction. And the members usually have privilege
to attend the Safwa Suite at a convention and let's say membership is a sort of
ticket to the club that I regard as exciting to belong to. You said there are
some 500 members? Yes. That must be the largest, uh... obviously the largest
it's ever been, probably. Yes, it's still growing steadily. The science fiction
market, well, until the last year or so, was booming. Various publishers,
paperback publishers, had regular plans to publish four, six, sometimes eight
titles a month. that, Willie Charlie Brown of Locust was keeping a record of the
books published and that kept growing until the total passed a thousand a year,
about half re-print and half new, including fantasy as well as science fiction.
I think that, well, since the depression, or whatever it was, where many
publishers have cut back their schedules, it is a little harder for a new writer
to break in than it was, but it's still a very profitable and exciting field
compared to what it was. When there was one magazine, I got 25 bucks for my
first story. Of course, the big money is from films and TV and such things as
that. I know you said that it's hard for you to keep up with everything that's
being published today, but do you have any particularly favorite authors, the
younger ones, say, starting in the last 10 years or so, that you think are going
to be valuable? Well, I don't follow well enough to say anything very
intelligent. When I was teaching, I regarded Esther Le Guin's Left Hand of
Darkness as the best recent novel and a great admirer of Heinlein, especially
the early Heinlein, Arthur Clarke but I don't really keep up. I just read or
reread some of Gordon Dixon's child's cycle and I'm impressed with a broad
optimistic view of human change and evolution he's presenting. What about New
Wave authors? I guess a new wave technically is passed, I suppose. I think so.
What was your response to that? I felt that the New Wave was—well, I was sort of
anti-New Wave because I felt that the New Wave people were—first of all they
were intensely pessimistic about science and They were trying to throw out the
traditional, accepted literary patterns that at least were accepted by me and
used in the field. And turning back to literary experiments by people like Dos
Pasos and James Joyce who had been tried a generation ago and they were brought
on as they were something new again. but I think by and large, well let's say,
some of the new wave writers were very able and the impact of the new world has
been, a new wave has been to improve the, well, the awareness of literary values
of style and so forth so by and large it's been a quote good thing. Is it
possible to blend, say, the mainstream or the new wave attempt with good science
fiction? Are they mutually exclusive or is it possible possible to have good
mainstream material at science fiction? Well, I'm not enthusiastic about
consolidating mainstream literature and science fiction, but I also remember
that there was a time when science fiction wasn't rolled of in the category by
itself and I don't think there's any reason it should be. When Wells was
publishing his stories, they were just novels or romances or whatever. The
science fiction was in a sort of ghetto, quote ghetto, for a generation. I think
this was partly due to the fact that this published in book magazines and people
looked down on the books. I think we're sort of getting over that, but it's
still a category, a publisher's category like westerns or gothics and love
romances or whatever. That means that if Don Wilhelm or Judith Lynn Del Rey or
someone else packages a book in a recognizable science fiction package, it'll
sell enough copies to make a profit. And I saw a limited profit because it is
shelled in the science fiction racks in the stands and the general public
doesn't see it. So people who get to be bestsellers, successful, people like
Vonnegut and so
forth, tend to want to get the science fiction label off their stories when they
begin to sell enough copies. but I've never reached that stage myself. I'm proud
to have mine called science fiction. Well, you mentioned the general public.
Probably the general public wouldn't be included as, say, fans of science
fiction. Is science fiction always going to be a separate thing? Is it still
separate where you have to be a member almost of a cult or an in-group? Well,
let's say some science fiction is. I think one thing, the most important thing
that's happened to the field is the diversification of it. Instead of having one
readership, we have many readerships. There's a limited group that are
interested in, let's say, the possibilities of hard science. In Syria, they look
at science fiction to explore possibilities of future social evolution, cultural
change, of the times of the psychological impact of new technologies and
everything. And there're more people who are interested in characterization and
story value and maybe literature has escaped so I think that we won't just have
one science fiction, but many varieties of it. But it seems to me that as far as
I can see ahead, there should be a public for, quote, science fiction, just as
there still is for Westerns or mysteries or other identifiable categories. You
don't see a more, say comparing, you're uniquely qualified to do this, say
comparing the readership of science fiction today with say back in the 30s or
early 40s, Wouldn't you say a greater proportion of the population reads and
appreciates science fiction than did they have? I think so. When I started,
nobody knew what it was, you had to explain it. There was one science fiction
magazine, though some science fiction stories were running magazines like Galaxy
and people like Wells and Conan Doyle have been publishing occasionally science
fiction, not for a specialized audience, all along. But certainly, there are
more people reading it now than there ever were before but there are a lot more
people who see it on TV or see I got some science fiction movies than ever
reading. When you got a convention these days where the Star Trek fans and the
comic book fans and the Star Wars fans and so forth, so that number of the
science fiction fans. A couple of weeks ago I was at a convention in Phoenix
that was attended by I think about 800 people and I was really And I was
probably the only identifiable hard science fiction writer there. They were Star
Wars characters. There were comic books authors and so forth who have the big
public. I'm no complaint about that. You don't think that hurts, uh, the kind of
science fiction that you value more, say the movies, the television, that kind
of material? Well, movies have very seldom been good science fiction. There have
been a few good science fiction films but science fiction, of the sort I like,
has been called a literature of ideas, and to some extent it is. The films I
think necessarily deal not in ideas but with emotions, with sensation. I just
saw the shining, and I liked it as a superb piece of filmatic craftsmanship.
inaudible 007 dot com. The shop socks of the audience, by and large as well.
There are people who feel it neglected characterization and feel that the
explanation of the supernatural is not consistent. But I feel that he knew what
he was doing and he did it. Considering consistency, where it seems to me that
he was making a deliberate appeal to the irrational, to the inexplicable, and to
the totally mysterious, if he tried to explain all the ghosts in the old hotel,
then why he would have been laying down the suspense at the same time. So, I
love it. But… Do you think there have been any successful science fiction movies
and good ones? 2001, I think, was tremendous. There are a number of others that
are regarded as classics. But typically the movies and TV haven't done what
might have been done. In the first year or two of Star Trek, and they were
buying professionally published science fiction stories. Stories written by
professional writers. I thought many of them were pretty good. Gradually, as
time went on, they went more and more into the standard Hollywood format and had
less and less originality and creativity. and so forth. Well, space 1999 and
about a star galactica, that is they have a plenty of money for all sorts of
expensive special effects but they have a content for the intelligence to the
audience. That is, they don't care about ideas, about consistency, or whatever.
All they're trying to do is create emotional effect that if you know too much
science or care too much about believability, well, the emotional effect doesn't
work. I'm about to ask a very broad question so you can feel free to edit it
down to a better size. What do you think goes into making a good science fiction
story? Tom Warsinger Well of course I'm something of believer myself in
emotional effects. That is, you need a strong conflict and you need something
that will involve the reader emotionally so that you need characters that he can
either hate or identify with. And you need some sense of originality. if you get
something new, but that is not always possible. I tend myself to, well, to look
for a theme for some sort of significant statement about science or the future
or the
of the impact of science and technology on individual human beings, on human
life, on society, on what the world might be. But I think all that is important
is for the writer to be genuinely interested in what he is saying about
something relevant to science and technology and change, it seems to me the
essential thing is probably that science fiction recognizes that the world is
changing under the impact of technology. The future is going to be different and
the mainstream main audience either doesn't know this or prefers to forget it or
whatever. That's a good distinction to make. I was going to ask you, is that
something you presented in your classes when you taught science fiction, that
it's concerned with change and distinction of mainstream material? Speaking of
your teaching, why do you think science fiction, say, should be taught, say, as
far down as junior high, junior high, high school, college? Is there any
particular value it can offer students? Well, I think that assuming that science
fiction does deal with change, the world is really changing. so the recognition
of this is a element of reality or realism that you don't have in a lot of
classic literature And kids growing up are going to be living in a world that's
different from the world around them now It seems to me they have a legitimate
interest in what the future is going to be And in a practical teaching
situation, you're trying to pull kids off the playground out of the front of the
TV and teach them to read, to understand, and to think and sometimes this is
pretty difficult. I've tried various approaches to various literary figures and
periods and some of them work very well and some of them don't, and it seems to
me that science fiction all the way offers a sort of bridge or a door or
whatever to the interests of a lot of students that you don't have if you try to
go back to Shakespeare, let's say.
Yes, I think one thing science fiction forces a person who's reading it to do is
to think about the future and to think about the world he's living in is related
to the future. I think that's basically what it's about really, as much as you
say it's about anything. And it seems to me that generally you can classify it
more or less as utopian or dystopian, that is that you can look for some
assumption that technology is good or that technology is bad, that the future is
going to be better or the future is going to be worse, or that the human being
is helpless victim of his environment and his own nature, or that he can make
significant decisions and change his environment and make things better than
there were. That was basically the approach I took in my classes. I like to
begin with the second two books on Father's Progress. It was written a
deliberate criticism of the early scientists to the Royal Society and so forth,
to present, as far as I could, selected stories that would be briefed on both
sides, dystopias and utopias optimism and pessimism selection from such people
as well Clark and Heinlein and so forth on one side and made my own and all that
plenty of dystopian fiction usually better written and more engaging than the
optimistic well though if you're going to categorize like that say you put Wells
and Huxley and Swift maybe Ellison on the one hand maybe Heinlein Asimov people
like that on the other I would put you on that side the second side with the
Optimist or the Utopian ultimately even though you did write the humanoids well
that's where I'd like to be okay that's fair but I've only got one more question
I'm done I don't know the tapes brought out too um maybe I misinterpreted
something you wrote, Dr. Williamson, but I thought I read somewhere where you
were skeptical of the possibility of finding intelligent alien life elsewhere.
No, I don't. I don't think I... Well, I'm skeptical about our actually finding
it because the universe is so vast and communication is so difficult. There are
two chains of probability or whatever. there's it it's been proven that the must
say the stuff of life originates elsewhere even then galactic clouds before
there any planets so the stuff of life is there and what I have to theoretically
develop on on any planet according to the best that there is really the galaxy
is full of planets so It ought to be there. But on the other hand, we have a
record of evolution for an four and a half billion years or whatever in the
solar system and there's no evidence that anything alien ever turned up here.
And at our best speeds so far, it will take many thousand years to get to
another world. And I'm just skeptical that the flying saucers are interplanetary
visitors or whatever. But I can see a possibility of, let's say, radio
communication or picking up radio signals or laser signals or something else.
But it also seems that this would have to go at the speed of light, which takes
100,000 years to cross the galaxy. So any very intimate conversation would take
a lot of time. Well, you've invented a couple ways for people to go faster than
light, haven't you? Yes. I'm very fond of Jerry Fineberg for the invention of
the talked to you on. And I've invented other devices of my own, and I regard
these as necessary for pieces of fictional machinery, but I'm not sure they're
going to work in reality. People keep saying that the Einstein speed of life
limit is not absolute, but there's a good deal to be said for it in practical
terms. But to summarize, in other words, you're not skeptical about the
existence or the possibility of intelligent life, just that we would be able to
contact it. Right, that's the right. I don't see why it shouldn't be there. Of
course, there's a sort of appalling possibility There's an opportunity to see
the possibility that an evolving species opens up the atom and commits
instantaneous suicide, but you can hope that wouldn't always happen.